# Debugging and troubleshooting

Both `fisdat(1)` and `fisup(1)` print messages to the terminal. There are a few things we can use to debug behaviour:

## Disabling validation

`fisdat(1)` has the `--no-validate` (`-n` for short) option. This will add a given data file and nominally associated schema, without using LinkML to validate the schema proper. This is primarily useful if your data are not in CSV format and you are only interested in uploading it (without doing any validation by running any jobs), but it may also be useful for circumstances in which LinkML fails to validate files which are valid (e.g. treatment of missing data is an open issue).

`fisup(1)` does not validate data files against associated schema files, but it does convert YAML schema files to TTL, i.e. there are a number of circumstances in which it is effectively validating that the schema files are valid YAML. The `--no-convert-schema` option is useful in these circumstances.

## Disabling uploads and simulating `fisup(1)` behaviour

`fisup(1)` has several related options:
- `--no-convert-schema`, which we have already encountered;
- `--no-upload`, which performs conversion of schema files and the manifest file, but only simulates upload;
- `--dry-run`, which simulates all operations, and does not write to the file-system.

Originally, there was only the single "dry run" option, simulating everything, but it became apparent that being able to test changes locally was very useful. There is a further, related option of note here, `--force`. The current behaviour is, during conversion, not to overwrite files which had already been converted, but this option overrides that.

## Verbose logging

There are two log levels common to both `fisdat(1)` and `fisup(1)`:
- `--verbose` (or `-v` for short), which sets the internal log level to "INFO" and shows debug messages by functions
- `--extra-verbose` (or `-vv` for short), which sets the internal log level to "DEBUG" and shows considerably more log messages, including those generated by LinkML, RDFLib, &c. 

The main intent behind adding these, especially the most verbose option, is to aid debugging when reporting issues on the issue tracker. Log messages tend to be quite long and may not be very informative.

In general, the messages printed to the terminal by the program try to make it fairly obvious which step has failed. Many Python programs show traces upon raising errors, whereas this one largely does not. (The errors are caught and messages in plainer language are printed instead.) The reason for this is that most of the errors were associated with the LinkML library which we are using, and were fairly non-specific, because they actually related to some of the libraries underneath (such as conversion between JSON-LD and RDF, or serialisation with RDFLib proper), and their interaction with network resources. 
